Q. Where are transplants done in BC? A. Transplants in BC can happen at St. Paul's Hospital or Vancouver General Hospital, both in Vancouver.
Q. Statistically, how many people are on the waitlist? How long is the wait time for a kidney? A. As of 2022, there were 517 patients waiting for a transplant in BC. The median wait time for a kidney is 2.7 years. This can vary based on blood type.
Q. Statistically, how many people are registered to be organ donors in BC? A. In BC in 2022, there are 1,577,233 organ donor registrations in total. Only 10258 new people registered however, compared to pre-COVID, when the average between 2017-2019 was 150,000 new registrations per year.
Q. What is the expected survival after getting a kidney? How much longer will I live after getting a kidney? What is the benefit from getting a transplant? A. For adult recipients of deceased donor kidneys, survival at 1 year is 97%, 5 year survival is 88%, and 10-year survival is 73%. For adult recipients of living donor kidneys, these figures are 99, 93, and 90% respectively.
Q. Will doctors still try to save someone's life if they know they are a donor?  A. A doctor who is trying to save someone's life in hospital has no way of knowing that they are an organ donor. Organ donation is considered only after all life-saving efforts have been used and it is certain that a person will not survive. Organ donor registration records are confidential, and only accessible by the donation team at BC Transplant, after it is determined that a person has no hope of survival.
Q. Does it matter how old someone is? Would anyone want the organs of someone very old? A. The oldest organ donor in BC was 76 years old. In Canada overall, it was 92 years old. There is no age limit, young or old. If it's something a person wants, then they should register their decision and let the specialists decide if donation is possible. People of all ages and medical histories should consider themselves potential donors.
Q. Can someone register if they have a medical condition? A. Yes, everyone should register a decision regardless of medical condition. The medical team does a thorough examination of every potential donor to determine what organs can be donated. There are very few medical conditions that would rule someone out as an organ donor.
Q. If someone registers, does that mean they will become a donor? A. It is very unlikely that someone would ever be a donor. A person is more likely to need a transplant than become an organ donor. Only about 1% of people in BC die in a way that allows them to be an organ donor. They need to be in a hospital, on a ventilator that is helping them breathe, and have no hope of survival. Organs are only recovered from someone if there is a matching recipient. 
Q. Why is it so important to register? Won't they just ask the family? A. Organ donation happens at a time of tragedy. In our experience, when a family sees a copy of the signed organ donor registration form, it provides relief and comfort and helps them support their loved one's wish to be an organ donor. We also encourage each person to talk to their family about their wishes for organ donation, so that they know what their loved one would want.
Q. Can a family override a person's decision? A. Donation happens at a time of tragedy. We ask the family if they are aware of any change in their loved one's decision, and will honour their wishes. In our experience, when a family sees a copy of the signed registration form it provides relief and comfort and helps them support their loved one's wish to be an organ donor. We also encourage each person to talk to their family about their wishes for organ donation, so that they know what their loved one would want.
Q. What do I say if someone says their religion does not allow organ donation? A. Most of the world's major religions support organ donation as an act of life saving, giving and compassion.  
Q. What organs can be donated? A. Heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, pancreas, pancreas islet.
Q. How are recipients chosen? A. There are many factors that go into choosing a recipient for someone's organs, including blood type, a person's size, how sick they are, and how long they have been waiting for a transplant. 
Q. Can I say who I want my organs to go to? A. No. Organs from deceased donors are allocated without prejudice following a comprehensive review and assessment process.
Q. What if someone passes away in another province or jurisdiction? A. Organ donation takes place in the country/state/province where the death occurs according to the policies and procedures in that jurisdiction.
Q. What does it mean to consent to donate organs and tissue for research? A. Medical advancement depends on the use of human biological material. It often provides the best way of understanding how the body works and reacts to treatment. It can also help advance and improve organ and tissue transplantation. If a person's organs and tissue cannot be transplanted, they can be donated for research purposes if they have consented to donate organs and tissue for both transplant and research.
Q. How long can an organ survive before it needs to be transplanted? A. Some organs can survive for longer outside the body (cold ischemia time). Heart and lungs can last 4-6 hours, liver for 8 hours and kidney for 12-18 hours. 
Q. How long does the organ donation process take? A. The organ donation process takes approximately 24 hours. After donation, the body is released to the family for funeral arrangements. 
Q. Can I donate my entire body to science as well? A. Only following eye or cornea donation, not organ donation.
Q. Can my family member still have an open casket funeral? A. Organ donors can still have open casket funerals.
Q. Are you more likely to get an organ if you are wealthy or rich or high class? A. Organs are matched based on medical need, not wealth or social status.
Q: How can social media help find a living donor? A: Social media can help share a story and expand the circle of potential donors. It allows for the sharing of information and can bring someone's attention to the need for a living donor. Most transplant candidates are uncomfortable with the idea of directly asking someone to be their living donor, so social media can help reach a wider audience.
Q: Do I have control over what I share on social media? A: Yes, most social media platforms allow for posts to be shared privately (to a select group of people approved by you) or publicly (to anyone who comes across your post).
Q: Should I keep my social media campaign private or public? A: It is recommended to start by communicating with your "inner circle" of family and friends and then expand to colleagues, faith groups, book clubs, and beyond. While public social media campaigns may help find an unrelated or anonymous donor, most organ donors are initially motivated by donating to someone they know.
Q: What is explorelivingdonation.com? A: It is a website developed by Dr. Amy Waterman that profiles real people - living donors, recipients, family members - and their living kidney donation and transplantation stories. This website may be helpful as you begin to think about the path ahead.
Q: Can anyone be a living donor? A: Anyone who meets the screening criteria can be a living donor. Donors do not need to be a blood relative, the same age, race, or gender as the recipient.
Q: Who is eligible to be a living donor? A: Eligible living donors must be age 16-60 (liver donor) or 18+ (kidney donor), have a healthy weight for height (or have a body mass index under 35), be in good overall health (no cancer, diabetes, etc.), and have a compatible blood type with the recipient.
Q: How do I start finding a living donor? A: Start by updating your family and friends, also known as your "inner circle," and tell them that your doctor has recommended transplant. If you are comfortable, widen your circle to neighbors, community groups, coworkers, and beyond. By sharing information about your circumstance, someone may come forward without you having to ask. Visit transplant.bc.ca to get tips on how to start the conversation about living donation.
Q. What is a Living Donor Champion? A. A Living Donor Champion is someone who advocates for and speaks out about living donation. They support and encourage individuals who are going through the steps toward transplant and act on their behalf in the search for a living donor. They alleviate pressure on the person in need of a transplant, start conversations about living donation, spread awareness about living donation, and provide emotional support.
Q. What does a Living Donor Champion do? A. A Living Donor Champion helps the person in need of a transplant by alleviating pressure on their efforts to find a living donor, starting conversations about living donation, spreading awareness about living donation, and providing emotional support.
Q. Why is it important to have a Living Donor Champion? A. Having a Living Donor Champion can help raise awareness about living donation and alleviate the pressure on the person in need of a transplant to find a living donor. A Living Donor Champion can also provide emotional support to the person going through the transplant process.
Q. What should be considered before sharing information about the need for a living donor on social media? A. Before sharing information about the need for a living donor on social media, it is important to confirm eligibility for a living donor transplant and to have been accepted as a patient at a transplant program. Sharing personal health information on social media may involve sensitive information and details about family and work life. It is important to obtain permission from individuals involved in the story and to be considerate of their privacy.
Q: Can TranpslantBC help me start a social media campaign? A: No, TranpslantBC cannot help you start a social media campaign or find a living donor. They can only provide general information on living donation and the donor assessment process.
Q: How do I start a social media campaign? A: To start a social media campaign, you or your living donor champion should have a social media account. You can share information on your personal Facebook account or create a Facebook Group or Page. A Group brings people together and can be made public or private. A Page is a public presence on Facebook that allows people to follow your updates.
Q: Will TranpslantBC test everyone who applies to be my donor? A: TranpslantBC assesses one donor per recipient at a time. The living donor team will test the donor who is most likely to be a match first. If they are deemed unsuitable, another donor will be tested.
Q: If I have a social media campaign, do my potential donors get priority in the assessment process? A: No, all recipients and their potential living donors are treated equally at TranpslantBC, regardless of whether or not they have a social media campaign.
Q: Can I start a fundraising campaign to cover my expenses and help my living donor? A: Fundraising is up to the individual. UHN cannot participate in fundraising for individual patients. It is illegal to pay organ donors in Canada, but you can raise money to reimburse them for out-of-pocket expenses.
Q: What is the first thing I should do before starting a living donor campaign on social media? A: Confirm that you are eligible for a living donor transplant and on the wait list. You will receive confirmation from UHN.
Q: Can someone apply to be my living donor through the TransplantBC Transplant Program if you are not a patient at TransplantBC? A: No, you must be a patient at TransplantBC to have someone apply to be your living donor through their program.
Q: What should I include in the "About" section of your personal page, Group, or Page when sharing your story for a living donor appeal on social media? A: A brief summary of your story, including what life was like before you got sick, why you need a living donor, what blood types are compatible with yours, and any other relevant information or photos you are comfortable sharing.
Q: What are the general eligibility requirements for living donors? A: For living liver donors, the age range is 16-60 years old. For living kidney donors, the age range is 18 or older. The donor must have a blood type that is compatible with the recipient's, and they must have a healthy weight for their height or a body mass index under 35.
Q: What is the first step to becoming a living donor through the Transplant Program? A: The first step is to fill out and submit the TransplantBC Health History Form.
Q: Where can you find the link, webpage, website, or url to the TransplantBC Health History Form? A: The link can be found at transplantbc.ca.
Q: What qualifications should a patient have to potentially benefit from a transplant? A: A patient should have progressive, irreversible renal disease, no active malignancy or infection, absence of systemic disease that would severely limit rehabilitation, life expectancy greater than 5 years with a successful transplant, effective family or social support systems, and willingness to comply with treatment and follow-up requirements.
Q: What eligibility criteria does the BC Transplant program follow? A: The BC Transplant program follows the published consensus guidelines of the Canadian Society of Transplantation consensus guidelines on eligibility for kidney transplantation CMAJ - Nov 08, 2005.
Q: How are referrals for kidney transplantation made? A: All referrals for kidney transplantation are made electronically through the PROMIS Kidney Transplant Referral module, and referrals will be made to one of the three transplant centers in Vancouver: Vancouver General Hospital, St. Paul’s Hospital, or B.C.’s Children’s Hospital (pediatric).
Q: What are some absolute contraindications to transplant? A: Some absolute contraindications to transplant include active malignancy, severe respiratory conditions, severe ischemic heart disease, severe peripheral vascular disease, transplant candidate with cirrhosis, severe cognitive impairment, active drug or alcohol addiction, and patient non-adherence to therapy.
Q: What is involved in a routine patient assessment for transplant? A: A patient is assessed by the transplant team, which includes physicians, surgeons, clinical coordinator nurses, and a social worker. During the assessment, patients and families receive written and visual information about transplantation, including program options, risks and benefits, medication regimen, lifestyle adjustments, and short and long term outcomes.
Q: What preliminary patient assessment investigations or blood tests or labwork should be performed by the referring center? A: The referring center should perform preliminary patient assessment investigations if possible. Testing that cannot be done locally can be arranged at the transplant centers. Patients who are on the active waiting list should have regular monitoring, including cardiac testing and viral screening.
Q: What laboratory tests are reviewed during the patient assessment? A: The following laboratory tests are reviewed during the assessment: ABO, complete blood count and platelet, fasting blood glucose, HLA typing class I and II, multiscreen panel (calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, AST, LDH, urea, creatinine, uric acid), electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride, CO2), total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, albumin and total protein, and lipid studies (total cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL, HDL). Other tests that are performed as required during the patient assessment include midstream urine for culture and analysis, micro/serology tests for Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, CMV, EBV, HIV, and Varicella, radiology studies such as chest X-ray and 12 lead Electrocardiogram, and additional tests such as PSA for males over 45 years of age and recent PAP smear within 6 months for adult females.
Q: Why are patients being assessed for cardiac disease and dysfunction before kidney transplantation? A: Cardiac disease is the leading cause of death following kidney transplantation. Therefore, patients being considered for transplantation should be screened for coronary artery disease and cardiac dysfunction to identify patients who have disease and would benefit from further treatment or intervention prior to the transplantation to improve life expectancy after transplantation.
Q: Who are the high-risk subgroups for coronary artery disease among potential transplant candidates? A: All potential transplant candidates are at higher risk of coronary artery disease, but there are some very high-risk subgroups. High-risk subgroups include those patients with prolonged duration of dialysis (greater than 5 years), family history of coronary artery disease (CAD) in first degree relative, history of smoking, dyslipidemia (HDL less than 0.9 mmol/L, LDL greater than 3.4 mmol/L), body mass index (BMI) greater than 30, history of hypertension, and above all diabetes mellitus.
Q: What are the useful tests to identify patients with cardiac disease among potential transplant candidates? A: Useful tests to identify patients with cardiac disease among potential transplant candidates include nuclear medicine myocardial perfusion imaging (MIBI) with exercise, MIBI with persantine, echocardiography with exercise, and echocardiography with dobutamine.
Q: What should be done if patients have a positive screening test for cardiac disease? A: Patients with a positive screening test should be referred to a cardiologist for further evaluation, usually including coronary angiography. Suitable patients with critical disease should undergo intervention with bypass surgery or angioplasty and stenting.
Q: Why do patients with severe diffuse disease sometimes get turned down for transplantation? A: Some patients with severe diffuse disease will be turned down for transplantation because of their poor prognosis.
Q: Why do transplant candidates with femoral bruits, claudication, or absent pedal pulses require a vascular assessment? A: Transplant candidates with femoral bruits, claudication, or absent pedal pulses require a vascular assessment because these are signs of peripheral vascular disease which can affect the success of a kidney transplant.
Q: What tests may be performed to assess the degree of vascular calcification in transplant candidates? A: Patients requiring vascular assessment may have iliac angiography with distal run-off or abdominal CT scan without contrast to assess the degree of vascular calcification.
Q: What screening tests are done for hepatitis B infection in transplant patients? A: Patients will have screening for evidence of hepatitis B infection, including HbsAg, HbcAb, and HbsAb. Patients who are HbcAb or HbsAg positive will have HBV DNA load determined.
Q: What happens if a patient is HBV DNA positive? A: All patients who are HBV DNA positive will be referred to a Hepatologist for further testing and consideration of treatment.
Q: Is HBV infection a contraindication to transplantation? Can I still get a transplant if I have HBV? A: HBV infection is not necessarily a contraindication to transplantation but will depend on the severity of liver disease.
Q: What is required for patients with hepatitis B infection while waiting on the renal transplant waitlist? A: Patients with hepatitis B infection will require annual liver panel and HBeAg, and every 6 month HBV DNA, and hepatology review at one year and two years.
Q: What does HBsAg, HBcAB, HBsAb, HBV DNA, and HBeAg stand for? A: HBsAg stands for Hepatitis surface antigen HBV infection, HBcAB stands for Antibody to hepatitis B core antigen Exposure to HBV infection may be active or inactive, HBsAb stands for Antibody to hepatitis B Surface antigen Immunity to HBV (vaccine-induced or a result of prior infection), HBV DNA stands for Hepatitis B viral load Active replication of HBV, and HBeAg stands for Hepatitis B e antigen Marker of replication and infectivity.
Q: What should be done for patients who are HBsAg negative and HBsAB negative? A: Patients who are HBsAg negative and HBsAB negative should be vaccinated against hepatitis B.
Q: What should be done for patients who are HBsAg positive with HBV DNA positive replication prior to transplant? A: Patients who are HBsAg positive with HBV DNA positive replication prior to transplant should be referred to gastroenterology (GI)/hepatology for assessing the degree of liver disease and for antiviral therapy (pre-transplant).
Q: What should be done for pre-transplant patients who are HBsAg positive and HBV DNA negative? A: Pre-transplant patients who are HBsAg positive and HBV DNA negative are inactive carriers (not actively replicating virus). These patients are at risk for reactivation of viremia and developing progressive liver disease triggered by immunosuppression after renal transplant. They should be reviewed by hepatology pretransplant to consider timing of treatment.
Q: What should be done for patients who are HBcAB positive but are HBsAg and HBV DNA negative? A: Patients who are HBcAB positive but are HBsAg and HBV DNA negative have cleared the virus from their blood but may still have latent virus in their liver. These patients are at risk for developing active Hepatitis B triggered by immunosuppression after renal transplant. These patients should be assessed and therapy considered on a case by case basis by GI/Hepatology.
Q: Does BC Transplant cover the cost of post-transplant HBV antiviral agents for some recipients of liver and non-liver solid organ transplants? A: Yes, BC Transplant covers the cost of post-transplant HBV antiviral agents for some recipients of liver and non-liver solid organ transplants depending on donor and recipient HBV core antibody status (in patients without active HBV replication) to avoid HBV reactivation with immunosuppressive therapy.
Q. If I have HCV hepatitis C, what do I have to do? What will I need? A. While waiting on the cadaveric renal transplant waitlist, HCV positive patients require a yearly liver panel, HCV quantitative RNA, abdominal ultrasound, CEA blood test, and a hepatology review.
Q. If I have hepatitis C or am HCV positive with viral replication or evidence of viral load, can I get a kidney from an HCV positive donor? A. You may elect to be eligible to receive a kidney from a donor who is HCV positive. There is evidence that this does not result in a worse prognosis for patients.
